Good afternoon everyone. Uh thanks a
lot. Um uh good afternoon by the way and
also thanks for joining for those from
different time zones. Um good morning to
those. Uh my name is Laura Stevens. I'm
a managing director at board of
innovation. Um thanks a lot for taking
the time to be here. Uh in this webinar
we are going to explore how AI is
reshaping uh competitive dynamics, how
it's disrupting business models and also
changing the economics of certain
industries which also explains why most
of today's enterprise AI strategies are
actually missing the point. Um as always
we'll also share some ideas around how
to respond. Um looking very much forward
to this uh session together. Uh maybe as
usual a few practical practicalities
before we begin. uh on the next slide
for those of you who don't know uh BOI
we are an AI transformation studio and
we are focused on helping organizations
to grow and to compete uh through AI or
within an AIdriven markets and to get
there we work with our clients across
two main dimensions so first we design
and we build AI first products services
business models and secondly we also
help uh companies to transform how they
operate how they deliver their services
but also how they market and sell in an
uh AIdriven world The webinar is being
recorded uh and we'll be sharing the
replay with you afterwards. Uh so um if
I move too fast and I definitely do for
those of you who know me um you will be
able to replay me at a at a normal pace
afterwards. Uh also feel free to drop
your questions in the chat at any time.
Uh my colleague Nick will keep an eye on
them throughout and if all goes well
we'll also have some time at the end for
a Q&A. So let's get started and we'll
start with an observation that we tend
to call the comfortable illusion and
that is that most companies today are
treating AI as a tool or as a
productivity upgrade. Uh what does that
mean? They they see AI as a way to make
their existing operating model more
efficient rather than rethinking whether
that operating model still makes sense.
And so then we see that their AI
strategy typically is a list of use
cases um which often came together
through a lot of bottom-up ideation
often with a very strong bias towards
quick wins efficiency gains um and often
a very big part of their efforts is
focused on things like running pilots
rolling out co-pilots uh creating task
forces training employees etc etc and
that's also what you'll see almost in
every traditional uh consultancy
playbook on enterprise AI now there's
nothing wrong with these activities and
they are all very important uh but they
are not enough. Uh and the reason for
that is quite simple and that is that AI
drives quite a structural and profound
shift in how organizations operate, how
they grow and how they compete. And that
is because AI and we can go to the next
slide now. AI is not just a tool but
it's something that economists call a
general purpose technology which is much
more similar to the internet or to
electricity. And so we know that these
technologies did not just improve
existing processes, right? We know that
they reshaped entire industries. And so
if we look at the history of these
general purpose technologies, we know
that they tend to come with three major
shifts, which you can see on this slide.
First, they en enable entirely new
business models. So not just better
versions of what already exists, but
actually fundamentally different ways of
creating and capturing value. So just
think about how the internet for
instance gave rise to e-commerce or to
social mediadriven business models. Uh
second uh these general purpose
technologies they also change cost
structures. Uh what do I mean by that?
When tasks that used to require require
a lot of human time and expertise can
now be automated and can be delivered at
scale they obviously become much cheaper
to produce. And so what once took hours
of uh a lot of skilled workers can now
be done in minutes just by an AI system.
And so that has a few very profound
implications which I'll discuss
throughout this session. And then
finally, as you can see on this slide,
these general purpose technologies, they
also drive changes in what defines
competitive advantage. So while
companies used to compete or still
compete on things like capital or size
or brand or reach, we know that these
things become less important in an
AIdriven economy and that competitive
advantage actually shifts to things like
propriety data or process and workflow
integration.
So if we understand AI through that lens
then the conversation actually moves
quite fast beyond efficiency and it
elevates it to a more strategic and
almost uh to an existential level. If we
go to the next slides, we say that this
is also where many companies actually
get stuck and why exactly an AI strategy
that is just a list of use cases misses
the point entirely because it
essentially means that you're applying
operational thinking to something that
is a very profound and structural shift.
So you're trying to optimize uh your
current model instead of just
questioning whether that model itself
still holds. And so the bottom line is
that a structural shift can never be
addressed with an incremental logic
which is unfortunately what we often see
in companies. And so treating AI as a
toolbox or a toolbox upgrade really
misses that bigger redesign opportunity.
Uh and I would also say that in a world
where competitors are redesigning uh
that gap that gap is becoming quite
dangerous.
If we go to the next slide, um what
we've seen is that general purpose
technologies come with changes to to
business models, to cost structures, and
to what defines competitive advantage.
And so these changes also explain why
certain business models today are being
disrupted. And so today we're going
going to look at three structural ways
in which AI is already kind of
disrupting markets. The first shift um
AI shifting control from humans to
algorithms. What do I mean with that?
Most markets today are structured or
based on the idea that humans are the
primary decision makers when it comes to
purchases. Right? So, humans are the
ones who compare options. They do it
imperfectly. Uh humans rely on brand
recognition because we're impulsive uh
creatures. We are influenced by
marketing. We have limited information
processing capacity and so forth. And so
the entire idea of marketing and sales
and pricing but also positioning are all
designed around the idea that humans are
making the decision. Now we all know
that today AI is increasingly mediating
how choices are being made. We have
algorithms that are ranking products. We
have AI recommending suppliers. And so
the result is that power is increasingly
shifting away from individual brands or
providers um to platforms and to systems
or companies that own those algorithms.
And so if you don't control that
algorithm layer uh algorithmic layer,
you're no longer actively involved in
shaping uh the customer decision. Um
we'll discuss in a little bit that this
trend is driving a lot of uh price
pressure, margin compression but also
profound changes in influencing
mechanisms in the space of marketing and
it even leads to the removal of certain
market layers. Second disruption AI
lowers the barriers to enter those
markets for those who follow the eye
fields shouldn't come as a surprise. We
know that capabilities that once
required scale and expertise or large
teams are now broadly accessible through
AI. And so the result is that new
entrance can emerge and they are built
up from the ground with AI at their
core. And so that means that they can
operate faster, leaner and also at a
structurally lower cost base. And so
what we see is that comp competition is
increasing and traditional players are
getting pressured.
Final way uh in which AI disrupts is
it's driving changes in what customers
are willing to pay for. AI makes
knowledge, content, code much cheaper to
produce. And so these things become less
scarce because it basically becomes
cheaper for everyone to produce the same
product or service. And so one of the
simple laws of economics which still
stands today is that when something
becomes less scarce um customers are
willing or less willing to pay premium
prices, right? And so any business model
that is built on the idea of time
monetization or product licensing starts
to come under pressure. So control
shifts, competition increases, value
moves. And so those are some of those
structural resets that AI is driving.
And again, they explain why this is not
just a technology wave but a market
resets.
If we go to the next slide, we're going
to deep dive a little bit uh into each
of these ways that AI is disrupting
business models. Let's start on the next
slide with the first way. So uh and that
is by reallocating control. So AI is
driving a shift from power to whoever
owns the algorithmic layer. Um there are
roughly three manifestations I would say
of uh that control shift that is driven
by AI. The first which you see on the
left side of this slide and that's
already happening at scale is that AI is
actively starting to shape our
purchasing decisions. We know that more
and more customers don't start their
search um on a brand website. They start
in Chat GPT or Perplexity. And so they
ask what is the best CRM for a midsized
company or which insurance provider has
the best coverage or what's the best
laptop under a,000 euros or dollars. And
so AI doesn't show 20 ads, at least for
now, but instead it summarizes, it
compares, it filters, it recommends. So
humans still make the final decisions
but the set of options that we consider
and how they are framed is shaped by an
algorithm. And so when that happens
there are a few things that follow. The
transparency increases. Uh it becomes
much easier for customers to make a
comparison. The competition intensifies.
People are getting uh put under pressure
uh in terms of prices and so margers
margins get under pressure. And even
worse if you're not surfaced by the
algorithm you may not even be
considered. So that's the first shift,
AI shaping decisions. The second shift
which you see on on the uh in the middle
of this uh slides uh goes a little bit
deeper and it's when AI does not just
shape decisions but it actually
increasingly starts to execute and to
optimize them. So think about AI books
the flights, AI selects the supplier or
AI renews the subscription. uh for
instance in procurement uh we know that
AI is increasingly being used to
evaluate suppliers whether that's on
price or availability or reliability and
so uh it recommends the optimal option
often still with human approval but we
expect that to change um uh over time
and so here it's actually the influence
that starts to shift to whoever controls
the system that is actually acting on
your behalf and so in these kind of
markets what we see is that suppliers
become come interchangeably uh faster.
So, switching costs would drop. The
impact of brand loyalty starts to
weaken. Uh performance metrics start to
dominate purchasing decisions and so
competition actually moves from
convincing people to making sure that
you're selected by systems. So, that's a
much stronger commoditization force. And
then the final shift is the most
structural one. AI doesn't just shape or
execute decisions, but it can also
remove layers entirely. uh especially
those layers that don't add a lot of
value. They only add coordination or
production efforts uh without owning any
defensible or unique assets. What do I
mean with that? And we know that AI is
removing layers that are just about
generating basic content are just about
aggregating information are just about
comparing options. A good example I
think is content production agencies. uh
if the if your value is writing standard
blog posts or creating basic ad copies
or producing simple visuals, AI can now
generate that directly and so that
production layer may shrink or disappear
uh at all. Um of course important to say
here not all intermediaries or
middlemans are vanishing as some people
for instance argue that platforms like
booking.com uh could be bypassed now
that AI is matching supply demands
directly. But booking is much more than
a a middleman. They own massive
behavioral data sets. Uh they control
real time hotel availability APIs. They
manage payments. They control
distribution and traffic. So that is a
much more defensible defensible
position. So context is uh is key here.
Um if we go to the next slide, one of
the most tangible examples of decisions
being shaped and potentially being e
executed by by AI is what is happening
in e-commerce right now. Um, Agentic
Commerce is evolving fast. Uh,
yesterday's chat bots were mostly
support tools. They were quite reactive
and limited. Um, or answering just basic
questions. Uh, today the assistants
already do much more. They are
explaining filtering comparing
recommending uh, and increasingly
guiding you straight to checkout. And
then we're probably also moving to a
world a world where the assistant
eventually uh itself becomes the
storefront meaning that it won't just
suggest products but it will bundle
options personalize offers personalized
offers and also negotiate preferences uh
and even complete the purchase wherever
the shopper is. And so at that point
brands are no longer competing for shelf
space uh but they are competing to be
selected by the agent. So that's what we
call mediation. the interface becomes
the decision maker.
On the next slide, you'll see where what
we're seeing today is probably just the
beginning. Right now, we are in the face
of purchase in chat in the US through
things like uh instant checkouts. Um for
the uh participating merchants um AI
assistants can already complete
transactions inside the conversation. Uh
so customers can basically search, they
can select, they can buy without ever
leaving the chat interface. It's already
a very meaningful shift. But further
down the roads, uh we're most likely um
going to evolve towards autonomous
agents um where the AI doesn't just help
you to complete a purchase, but it
starts to manage the entire journey from
discovery to comparison to checkouts
with minimal customer involvement. And
beyond that, we're likely even to move
to an agentto agent commerce uh where
your AI agent will directly talk to
brand agents and start to negotiate
options, check availabilities, uh
compare bundles and complete the
transaction on your behalf, often
proactively uh with almost no input from
you. And so at that point, uh customers
are no longer actively navigating
markets uh but their agents are.
On the next slide, uh, a few words about
the implications, right? Everyone is now
optimizing for visibility, but the
implications of agentic commerce for
sellers and retailers are much more
profound in my perspective. So, first,
sellers will no longer have to optimize
for human shoppers or single platforms.
They will need to optimize for AI
agents. And each of these different
agents will have different preferences
depending on which model or which
platform is being used.
uh so these agents are going to act as a
middleman between you and the customer
meaning that you'll continuously have to
adjust your approach uh to meet uh the
different demands. Second, as already
mentioned, we're uh we will be seeing
margin erosion because AI agents sit
between buyers and sellers. They'll be
capturing a share of value. Um this
means more volume but at the cost of
thinner margins.
Third, uh data monetization will get at
risk. What do I mean? Uh the rise of uh
zeroclick research also means that
customers can get the information they
need without ever visiting a website
which is also likely to erode direct
traffic leaving retailers with less
access to customer data and less ability
to understand or influence that
behavior.
And finally, revenue streams will be
threatened. Uh especially traditional
advertising based monetization models
will start to weaken. uh instead val
value is going to shift to AI visibility
optimization where sellers compete for
visibility inside the AI ecosystem.
So very clear that sellers retailers
will have to start rethinking how they
reach their customers, how they capture
value and how they protect their
margins.
Uh on the next slide, let's maybe take a
closer look at when or where uh that
commoditization or mediation hits
hardest because it's true that not all
industries are business models are uh
being affected equally. Uh we know that
AI has the greatest impact on markets
that are comparable that are measurable
and that that are also frequently
optimized. So what do I mean? First the
market is comparable. Um so if the core
product um is very standardized uh and
multiple suppliers can meet the same
needs then substit substitution
basically becomes easy. So AI can make
comparison recommendations much faster
and more accurately than humans pushing
basically everyone in the market towards
the same offer.
Second, uh uh AI um commoditizes fastest
when the buying logic is mostly um
centered around price. When price is the
dominant factor in buying decisions,
then optimization starts to matter more
more than uniqueness. Uh for me, an
example is for instance energy. Um uh I
I'm the worst possible person in um
comparing all potential energy
providers. Um so for me, price is
actually the only thing that matters.
And so in these kind of markets AI is
very effective at optimizing just based
on cost so that sellers are forced also
to compete on price.
And then third um in case where the
decision making environment favors AI
what do I mean markets where decisions
are high frequency uh where options are
complex uh and performance is also
measurable they also create an
environment in which AI mediation
actually excels. We know from
neuroscience that humans struggle to
process a lot of uh information uh or
they struggle to analyze complex options
quickly. Think about telco bundles again
energy terrorists but AI algorithms can
handle it. Um and so they can do it um
at a fraction of the time that we need
as humans making it the ideal tool for
those environments.
So already gave a few examples. Telecom
plans, bundles, energy procurements,
cloud usage, um energy trading, all
examples of u environments uh where AI
actually is a great help in um um uh
purchase uh mediating purchasing
decisions.
On the next slide, and as mentioned, uh
AI is not just reallocating control
inside markets, uh but it's also
reshaping who can actually enter the
market in the first place. uh and it
does that by dramatically lowering the
the barriers for new entrance um to
enter the markets. And this is
definitely not a future trend. It's
already happening. Um uh we'll dive um
deeper into this second order disruption
uh on the next slides.
Um so we're seeing the rise of new
competitors. Um for those of you who
follow uh the fields, this shouldn't
come as a surprise either. Um we know
again as already mentioned that in the
past um uh being successful in a market
required either large teams or
significant capital or deep expertise um
and AI is now dramatically reducing the
cost of building products of
coordinating efforts of scaling
expertise and so you actually no longer
need to have scale or massive headcounts
to uh compete effectively.
The first thing is um as you can see on
this slide, coordination costs are
collapsing. So AI enables smaller leaner
teams to actually coordinate their
efforts far more efficiently than
traditional players. And so these
companies actually move faster because
AI handles the core tasks and processes.
Uh meaning they don't need all the
layers of management or manual processes
that larger firms typically rely on.
Second, production becomes
softwaredefined.
What do I mean? AI makes it much easier
to start a company and build a product.
Again, um I'm uh repeating myself, but
what used to require a significant time,
capital, specialized expertise uh can
now be done faster and at a lower cost.
I think writing software, creating
marketing materials, AI really enables
that those small teams to accomplish
what previously required much larger
teams. And so these companies can scale
very quickly. Uh they build fast,
iterate with far fewer resources and as
a result they need fewer people uh with
less capital to bring something valuable
to the markets and also compete in those
markets.
Um this is not fiction. We're already
seeing uh AI native companies or solo
unicorns as some people say that are
generating substantial revenue with only
a fraction of the workforce that
traditional firms would require. And
there's a lot of talk today about the
rise of the so-called solo unicorns, the
one person companies that are powered by
AI that could in theory reach billion
dollar valuations.
While I personally haven't seen like a
true solo unicorn, um we are starting to
see signals of what's possible. And I
think on the next slide, a good example
is B 44. It's a company that was fored
um founded by a 30 31-year-old developer
as a kind of a side project using Vibe
coding. And so in just six months and
without raising any outside capital, uh
that company grew to 250,000 users. uh
it became profitable and it actually
generated uh more than 3.5 million in
ARR um and so only after 6 months uh it
was acquired for 80 18 so 80 million uh
in cash now it wasn't literally a one
person company I think it was about
eight people but that's exactly the
point right a team of fewer than 10
people built scaled and exited a company
at a valuation that traditionally would
have required dozens sometimes hundreds
of employees and significant venture
capital. So there's also a lot of u
things that are exciting exciting about
this wave. But I think what this example
shows is that AI dramatically compresses
the resources needed to build launch and
scale a company and when the cost of
building drops uh barriers to enter fall
and competition increases. So that's
quite a structural shift. on this slide.
Another example of the shift is Basis
AI. That's also an AI native company
that reached a 1 billion valuation with
a very lean uh team, at least much
leaner than traditional service uh
companies would require. Uh what makes
the company unique is that it's not a
typical accounting software vendor, but
it's an AI first platform that is fully
built around autonomous agents that can
actually handle end-to-end accounting
tasks from document review to tax return
preparation. So this is really a new
breed of competitor and it operates with
a fund fundamentally different business
model, a different scaling logic and an
extremely high revenue per FTE.
Uh on the next slide, a final way um uh
in which AI is disrupting business
models is by changing what customers are
willing to pay for. Um historically uh
businesses um or still today businesses
are selling products or services mainly
based on units or time. So what do I
mean with that? You pay per products or
you pay per hour or you pay per seat or
you pay per projects. Uh and customers
are essentially paying for effort right
time spent uh documents produced uh code
written reports delivered. Meaning that
revenue is for many businesses directly
linked to human effort or to physical
production. Now when AI generates those
outputs instantly and at a very low
cost, something changes, right? So
people start to wonder, why would I pay
€5,000 for a market analysis if AI can
produce a comparable report in minutes?
Or if an extensive coaching report can
be generated in seconds, then why would
a customer still pay a premium price for
the report itself? In the same line, if
a marketing copy or legal drafts or
financial analysis or software quotes
can be produced almost instantly, then
customers begin to question why they are
really what they are really paying for.
So again, when the cost of producing
knowledge drops, the willing to pay for
that production drops as well. And so
what we see is that customers shift from
paying for effort to wanting to pay for
outcomes or wanting to pay for real
impact. And that's the disruption here.
So AI is not just reducing cost, it's
changing what is perceived as valuable.
And that has a few implications. If we
move to the next slides, the first
manifestation is that we see the erosion
of uh the so-called monetization of
human time. For many companies, billing
effort or billing by effort or by hours
is no longer a sustainable model. Right?
So uh as AI is starting to automate more
tasks that growth starts to become
decoupled from headcounts making it
harder to defend such a business model
that actually relies on charging by the
hour or by employee. At the bottom line
is um often that customers no longer
want to pay at least premium uh uh
prices for time spent. Um two different
manifestations. uh one uh in some cases
AI directory replaces the need for
services that were historically
performed by humans in that they can now
be done by AI at a fraction of the cost
and time examples basic design
translation entry level uh legal
drafting. So these tasks are easily
automatable um they and so basically
meaning that businesses can no longer
rely on human labor or junior talent for
these roles.
In other cases, think professional
services like consulting, like legal,
accounting. AI does not necessarily
replace the entire function, but it
starts to erode the reliance on human
time. U meaning that AI primarily
impacts things like billable hour
revenue or junior leverage or the
typical pyramid-based staffing models
that we see in consulting, right? So AI
is very unlikely to going to fully
replace these jobs but it's automating
repetitive cognitive tasks leading to
few hours builds. So that means uh it
basically directly compresses margins um
by reducing the dependency on human
human labor especially for junior roles.
This is a real trend at the compression
of billable labor uh and it's also
reshaping how service-based industries
uh are making money. uh we know that
many consultancy firms for instance
already start to feel or expect pricing
pressure on billable hours and so are
actively exploring uh more value based
or subscription based pricings.
Second manifestation um we see a shift
also in assetbased monetization.
What do we um the slide is not moving. I
don't know. Yes, thank you. Um so a
shift in asset based monetization. What
do I mean with that? Um traditionally
companies are selling physical products
um as a kind of one-off transaction. So
you buy a washing machine or uh you buy
a tractor or uh you you buy an
industrial compressor and so the
transaction basically ends at the
delivery. Now in an AIdriven world that
becomes insufficient in the sense that
customers increasingly expect more than
just the product. They expect
performance right availability um
continuous value. I think one of the
examples is home appliance right in the
past you just bought a washing washing
machine that was it. Uh today smart
appliances uh are able to monitor usage,
predict maintenance, optimize energy and
etc etc and so uh even automatically
reorder uh things like uh detergents and
so the product becomes part of a service
ecosystem and so customers may start
paying not just for the machine but also
for commitments like guaranteed uptime
or energy efficiency uh and so forth. Um
maybe uh uh just a proactive um
reflection. Of course uh we know that
service servit servitization is not new.
Uh but what changes is that AI or AI at
least changes the feasibility and the
scale of performance-based models right
um again another example is um
industrial machinery. Instead of selling
a machine, manufacturers can now move at
scale to things like power by the hour,
uptime guarantees, predictive
maintenance contracts, uh, etc. Um, with
AI, machines generate data. AI can
predict failure. AI can optimize
outputs. And so, the customer doesn't
just want the assets, it wants outputs
and reliability. Another example, which
probably most of you know, is
Rolls-Royce, the jet engines. Um,
airlines don't buy engines, they buy
ours trust. and the manufacturer takes
responsibility for maintenance and
uptime. And that same logic is actually
now spreading across industries, even in
construction equipment, agriculture,
manufacturing, even in in pharma, we see
companies starting to think about more
outcome based pricing and so forth,
right? Um, so in both the service- based
and the asset based industries, the
shift is similar. It comes down to the
fact that companies move from selling
discrete units or hours or assets to
offering more continuous integrated
outcomebased solutions.
If we go to the next slides um just to
make it uh tangible again in case you uh
didn't fully understand for service-
based companies um this often means a
shift to service as um software. Sorry,
I'm still talking about previous uh
slides. Uh Cena realize this is
confusing. Uh on the left side you see
that for a service-based companies that
often means a shift to um service as a
software. Uh so let's take the example
of a player in assessment and coaching.
Traditionally these companies they offer
um human delivered services like
one-on-one coaching or like in-depth
assessments or personalized feedback
typically charged by the hour or a
package of hours. With AI, many of these
aspects like the generation of feedback
or uh the generation of development
plans can now be automated without the
need for human intervention in every uh
interaction. So that means uh that
instead of billing for human hours or
expertise, these companies can now move
towards offering a more productized and
a more scalable version of their
services which is no longer dependent on
individual coaches. Um maybe important
to highlight is that shift because we're
working with quite a lot of service-
based organizations. That shift goes far
beyond how services are delivered. But
it also requires these companies to
rethink their pricing structure. And the
traditional model works with hourly
rates based on humor um human labor. But
in an AIdriven model, these companies
move to subscriptionbased or access
based pricing. Um now let me be clear
there as well. Unless the offering um uh
delivers differentiated outcomes or
propriety value then also subscription
models themselves come under pressure
which is what we're currently seeing uh
in SAS. We're going to discuss that in a
bit. So this is quite a profound shift
for service- based organizations. Um it
really forces companies to rethink what
customers are truly willing to pay for
and how they can monetize that. On the
right side of this slide, you see that
for assetbased companies, the shift
often means moving away from selling
products to selling outcomes. And so
instead of selling physical products,
businesses are moving to models like
equipment as a service or materials as a
service or even infrastructure as a
service uh the bottom line is that the
focus is shifting to continuous value
delivery rather than just product sales.
Um just to make it uh concrete on the
next slide another example in machinery
the old model is about selling machines.
So we sell machines or materials and so
the revenue model is directly tied to
the volume sold. More machines more
units sold means higher revenue. Uh
revenue is typically based on capix
sales. So selling machines for instance
or spare parts. uh maintenance contracts
and so the risk sits with the customer
um or the person who owns the
equipments. Um today uh performance
becomes measurable at scale uh as a
result of AI. Uh and so um it's driving
changes in what customers expect. In
particular, we see that customers now
expect things like guaranteed uptime or
output based contracts and so forth. And
looking ahead uh we will see that their
growth models of these asset based
companies will be less and less tied to
production volume or units sold and move
uh to being tied to operational
outcomes.
Before we move to the final section of
this webinar uh where we uh discuss how
to respond, let's briefly talk about
what's happening in SAS on the next
slide because we cannot give a webinar
about AI disruption without talking
about uh SASbased models. Uh so for a
very long time building software was
expensive. It was slow. Uh you needed
large engineering teams, big budgets,
long product cycles and so that was what
created the real barriers to entry,
right? It also created strong pricing
power for software companies. Now AI is
changing that uh and this shift is kind
of accelerated quite dramatically over
the past two to three years I would say
in the sense that AI's coding
capabilities have advanced to the point
where AI can actually generate
substantial portions of code uh with
humans supervising and refining the
outputs. Uh so today developers are no
longer writing everything line by line.
They're supervising, they're prompting,
they're refining. Even companies like
Spotify or um Antropic they openly say
that a large share of their code is
actually being written with the help of
AI agents. Now of course uh just to
anticipate that doesn't mean that
engineers are obsolete but it does mean
that the economics of building software
are changing. Again what used to require
20 engineers may now require five. What
used to take months can now take weeks
uh etc. Uh so here again two things
happen at the same time. First, the
barriers to enter entry fall becomes
easier for new competitors to enter the
markets. Second, when it becomes easier
to build alternatives, customers become
less willing to pay premium prices,
especially if the product is nothing
more than a thin wrapper uh around
functionality AI um that that AI can
generate directly. So, that's the supply
side effect, but there's also a demand
side disruption. A lot of these uh SAS
companies, they price per seat per user
per month. uh a model that assumes that
value scales with a number of human
users. AI again breaks that assumption
because if AI allows smaller teams to do
the same amount of work then fewer
employees need direct access and so
fewer seats are required. So the issue
here is that value creation becomes less
dependent on the number of users and so
any pricing model that is tied to the
number of users becomes under pressure
and will affect how scalable your
pricing model will remain.
Um, in any case, as you can see on the
right side, financial markets are
starting to reflect these structural
concerns. Uh, we've seen a more negative
stock ratings on on SAS companies
recently because investors are worried
that margins will increasingly come
under pressure that software software
will become easier to replace. Of
course, again to anticipate doesn't mean
that all SAS companies are equally
vulnerable. Some have real modes. Uh I'm
not going to um uh go deeper into that
uh for the sake of time because I'm see
I I see that I'm uh really behind. So
we'll try to even accelerate. I know
that many of you probably don't like to
hear that but uh but still uh next
slide. So um uh how can you assess
whether your business model is at risk
from AI? will be a little bit of
repetition but we've developed an AI
disruption index which is also uh online
um that consists basically out of eight
categories that we believe you should
consider when evaluating uh AI's disrup
disruption potential. Uh it's something
that you can really use. It's a
practical framework to discuss with your
executive team or leadership team to
really understand where your model is
most vulnerable to AI disruption. It has
things like operational exposure,
meaning um how much of your work is
templated driven, repetitive, focused on
information handling, uh accounting is a
good example because a significant part
of traditional accounting work involves
collecting invoices. Um preparing
standardized financial statements,
drafting tax filings. So the work is
super structured, rule-based, template
driven, um clearly a disruption. Um of
course there's also the business model
itself. So ask yourself to what extent
is your value creation and your revenue
tied to human time and scarce expertise.
We've discussed that quite extensively
uh throughout this webinar. Um uh we've
discussed interface um
disintermediation.
Um offerings are most vulnerable to
disintermediation if your offering is
easy to compare based on measurable
criteria, if customers choose you mainly
based on price uh or if decisions are
low risk but involve many comparable
options. Uh there are elements around AI
capability maturity. basically how well
do current AI systems actually perform
the core tasks in your industry at a
reliable and also a production ready
level. Um uh now let me be clear with
the current pace of advancements. It's
very clear that AI's capability maturity
should always be assessed dynamically.
Everyone who follows AI's progression
knows that we're not just seeing
incremental updates. AI performance
shows very large one-year jumps on
several ben benchmarks. So take that
into account. Um and maybe just there's
there's a few things that I didn't
discuss today and that is that there are
also factors that can temporarily
protect your business from AI
disruption. First one is the degree of
customer acceptance. Uh here the
question is how comfortable are your
customers with AI replacing human
interaction. And of course there's also
regulatory friction there. It's about
how much regulation actually slows down
or constrains AIdriven disruption in
your industry. Now I want to mention
that my personal belief is that
regulation is often a delay mechanism
but it's never a permanent shield. Um
now um given everything we're we've
discussed on the next slide, it should
be very clear that an AI strategy is not
just about a list of use cases. Um it's
not just about deploying models.
Instead, uh, an AI strategy should be
about rethinking how your company, um,
creates, how your company captures, and
how your company defends value in a
market that is increasingly shaped by
AI. That means rethinking your business
model, rethinking how you deliver value,
and also rethinking your organizational
structure.
On the next slide, um just a few more
minutes, um we'll dive into how to
respond to these shifts and position
your company for success. As AI is
restructuring markets and giving rise to
new competitive dynamics, AI
transformation in our perspective needs
to operate on three critical tracks. Uh
for those of you who follow BOI, uh
you'll see that these tracks are the
three tracks of our AI first
transformation. uh which we've laid out
um uh in detail in our AI first uh
playbook uh and which we also
consistently apply in our transformation
work with clients. Uh the first track is
what we call strategic reinvention. Uh
and that basically means in an AI first
world it's essential to reconsider where
you play and how you how you win. Uh,
and that includes a consideration of
where your b business model is most
vulnerable or exposed to AI disruption,
where scarcity and value really sits,
what makes you hard to replace um, when
AI can actually replicate so much, what
are you selling, and how do you monetize
what you sell in a world where
performance and outcomes drive value,
but also who are you actually competing
with in an AIdriven market. The second
track which we call workflow redesign uh
is actually focused on identifying where
you can dramatically improve uh the
scalability, the cost base, the overall
economics of your delivery model. So
there we look at things like which
workflows are repeatable, high volume,
labor intensive, meaning that an AI
first redesign can actually materially
reduce human effort or shorten life
cycle times or lower the marginal cost.
The goal here is not incremental
efficiency but it's really about
structural redesign. And then finally,
as AI changes how you deliver value, it
also becomes key uh to rethink your
internal structure, governance, roles,
responsibilities, your interaction
models, but also things like culture,
skills, capabilities, which is exactly
what we do in the third track, which we
call operating model redesign.
Um if we move to the next slides um we
actually had planned to do a deep dive
in each of these uh tracks but I also
realized that this webinar has already
been uh information heavy. Um maybe very
briefly uh we have a framework which we
um uh always uh walk our clients through
in the strategic reinvention of their
business model and it looks at five
structural moves that can help expo
expose businesses to actually defend
value. Um I'm not going to go uh through
these um uh separately but let me maybe
discuss one or two. One key move that
many businesses will have to consider is
how they can create an irreplaceable
differentiated value through AI. That
means uh embedding AIdriven insights,
personalized experience in into your
offering so that customers can actually
see your products or services as unique
even with AI interfaces or ecosystems.
And I think um a good example for me is
Sephora uh which has uh launched an AI
powered virtual artist what we actually
see in many beauty brands but it creates
an experience that is not just about
price but it's about a personalized
beauty journey if you want. Um and when
customers feel that they're getting
something unique or tailored um they are
of course less likely to switch purely
based on cost. So differentiation
reduces comparability and that protects
margins. Another structural move is
better utilization of propriety data if
you have them. Um as discussed data is a
competitive mode in an AIdriven world
and it's not just about the massive data
sets from the companies like Netflix or
Spotify. It's really about owning unique
or domain specific data that others
cannot replicate. I think about data
from installed machine bases. So we work
with foundry businesses for instance to
see how they can monetize that data. But
also data from research, coaching
sessions, assessments. All these data
can potentially be leveraged to drive
new services or optimize performance or
provide insights that competitors cannot
access. Maybe a very quick example is
the example of a Dutch gaming
entrepreneur. I don't know uh who has
followed the news but um it's it's a
Dutch entrepreneur who recently rejected
a roughly 500 million acquisition offer
from OpenAI for his company's video
gameplay data. So the guy had built up a
massive data set for from gaming clips
and player behavior which of course can
be of huge value for training future AI
models. Uh and so he basically turned
out a huge offer went on to launch his
uh own company focused on AI models
trained on on that propriety video data.
So very clear that owning propriety data
can become a very defensible mode in an
AI world where generic outputs are easy
to replicate.
We're going to skip a few slides, make
sure that there's at least um room for a
few questions. So, Sena, if you would be
willing to uh skip a little bit uh
through to the last this one is is
perfect. Um so, I think uh with these
final insights, let me leave you with
one uh important reminder. If your AI
strategy today is a list of use cases,
uh if it's only about co-pilots or
shallow tools or use case
implementation, then you're most likely
trying to optimize a business and an
operating model that will no longer hold
in the future. And in such a case, I
would definitely recommend you to go
back to the board uh whether that's the
executive board or the drawing board uh
and redesign your AI strategy around
structural reinvention, workflow
redesign, and operating model
transformation because incremental AI
may buy you a little bit of time uh but
it's definitely not going to protect you
in a market that is being fundamentally
reshaped. Thanks a lot for bearing with
me. Uh I'm very afraid to look at the
comments because I'll probably see a lot
of tips and tricks about um uh slowing
down um which I dramatically failed but
I hope you uh uh still have a few
questions that we can um tackle together
with Nick. Thanks.
>> There's Well, first of all, thanks so
much. Uh I think I have the attention
span of a five-year-old and I was glued
uh to the screen for the last 45 minutes
uh and about 200 people together with
me. There's quite a lot of questions. Um
I think the there's an interesting one
that I see coming back from both Anna
and Benjamin um which I think also
applies to us. It's about what does all
of this mean in the context of a
professional services firm or for
digital agencies and so forth. Um so
maybe just to frame the question to you
how do you think about how this whole
wave is disrupting our own industry um I
think we saw in the last 5 10 years a
lot of agencies building software trying
to pivot to sort of a SAS model
increasingly now we're seeing reports of
McKenzie that's moving more towards even
more towards outcome based pricing agent
based delivery model less junior
analysts and so forth so I know there's
a lot to unpack there um but love to get
your perspective on it and maybe just
starting with I guess the most burning
question. Uh will both will we both both
of us still have a job three years from
now
and I think you're on mute Laura.
>> Yes, sorry I actually have no doubt
about us having a job. technique might
be overly optimistic but I I think uh we
are not just advising clients right
we're also applying our own frameworks
to uh how we operate as an organization
um meaning that we constantly scan where
does real value actually sit for our
clients how can we actually leverage AI
to um operate more efficiently and
effectively um and what does this
actually mean also for our own team
structure uh and making sure that we
have sufficient leverage that we can
actually fundamentally operate
differently uh compared to uh
traditional consult consultancy firm.
So, um we're definitely eating our own
uh foods or or breakfast and actively
applying um our transformation
frameworks to our own business model and
operating model.
Maybe just building on that I think
there was also a question from Malcolm
which was more in the legal sector but I
think it's a question that gets asked
quite often is if we if we are all
indeed starting to rethink that happens
across industries right trying to
rethink like the the delivery model um
what does that mean for more junior
talents like how do how do young people
get initial opportunities and second
like how do you start building the
expertise that we that we are now
assuming will remain
valuable.
>> That's a very existential question,
Nick. In my perspective, I think to be
honest, what we see is that a lot of
those entry- level positions are exactly
the uh um those where um uh AI is
actually taking over a lot of um a lot
of activities. Um so I think for AI
transformation, what we're actively
doing is building more senior teams. Um
that is the implication of that. Um all
other questions for me nik are actually
quite existential and probably require a
separate uh webinar uh overall.
>> Yeah fair. I think those those do
positions it more in the realm of
politics and sort of the societal impact
of AI which I think we can spend 10
webinars talking about maybe shifting
towards customer expectations and and
value perception like you you spoke
about
content and value being sort of
generated instantly. I think there was a
question in the in the group from uh
from Chris
about that like how do you think clients
or or as a business how should you think
about like offering value towards
clients things that you were
traditionally um that was traditionally
taking labor. So then means that you can
actually charge money for it which now
just requires some CPU usage and
essentially comes at a marginal cost of
zero. um like how do you see those kind
of business models being impacted?
>> Yeah. So the the exercise that we
actively do with our CL all our clients
is actually we call it the IP uh well
basically right what are your unique
assets that um um that are not that
because a lot of companies had labor as
a sort of a scarcity advantage right but
now that labor is no longer a scarcity
advantage then every company now needs
to reconsider what makes them unique and
it can be about as mentioned those
propriety data it can be about deep
integration in your customer workflow
uh which is a very powerful tactic which
a lot of companies are actively
exploring. So how can you deeply
integrate into the ERP systems of your
customers for instance in in case of uh
in case you're a material provider uh uh
how can you integrate with with those
workflows so that the switching cost
actually becomes harder of course
there's also things like relationships
etc but uh they will only um I'm not
100% sure if they will stand uh um the
test of time um it's an active exercise
for every company to think about um
their modes their assets that make them
truly unique and scarce to their to
their customers. Yeah. So maybe in your
in your experience when you're having
conversations at sort of like EXCO level
within
I know you're working a lot with telos
for for example or or utility companies
like how how much of a burning platform
do you do you think there is for for
leaders and and do you do you notice any
patterns about like type of leaders that
are like really leaning into this um or
certain sectors where you might might
say the
>> the urgency is less
real
>> yeah I think there's a huge burning
platform uh especially in data heavy
industries right where um there's active
monetization potential of those
propriety data of course there's there's
quite some challenges that I see as well
of course we have data quality uh data
accessibility um um lack of informed
consent so that customers or people were
never properly informed about uh
actually being able to use or monetize
this these data etc etc but yes there is
a burning platform form. Um, what I see
is that companies that are most
successful and where I truly believe
that they can make the difference is
customers that are willing to or
organizations that are willing to step
outside of that incremental mindset. So
there's a lot of companies who spend the
majority of their time on apologies for
my English uh solving the of
yesterday. Um that's a huge risk uh
because um as as should be clear from
this webinar uh thinking about your your
business model or how AI actually makes
you uh vulnerable requires deliberate
time and to step outside of uh the
comfort zone. Also start planning for a
more active transformation um uh and
kind of setting aside that idea of I
just want to have quick wins and
efficiency gains on the short term uh
because that's an incremental
optimization question instead of a
business model reinvention. So I think
that mindset and that willingness to
step outside of um the daily comfort and
um and the status quo is what will
eventually make the difference.
>> It's kind of a control. Yeah. And I'm
wondering because you spoke a bit about
like some of the existing modes like
channels distribution IP physical
products and so forth which I think in
some industries are hard to to challenge
if you're if you're a new entrance in
the market. Um isn't the risk more that
your existing competitors are going to
wake up early and take a more AI first
approach to the problem? And I realized
we were going to be cut off in about 40
40 seconds. So
>> very briefly, Nick, yes, it's a risk and
we see some companies are quite
proactive uh and and looking forwards
while some uh in some companies there's
a board that is actually skeptical,
cynical, doesn't believe, doesn't feel
the urgency. And so yeah, that that's
where I'm mostly worried. And indeed, we
we know that their competitors are
making steps, actively preparing for a
broader transformation. So there's a
real risk of indeed not taking that wave
and leap um and getting prepared for a
more fundamental disruption. Yeah.
>> All right then. Uh we're about at time.
So maybe want to thank everybody for
joining. I want to thank you Laura for
the really inspiring webinar. Uh and
dropping your LinkedIn in the chat uh
following everybody's example. Also
dropped my own. So if if anybody on the
audience wants to continue the
conversation, please reach out feel free
to reach out to Laura Le in the chat or
or to myself. And um thanks so much
everyone for joining and enjoy the rest
of your day evening.
>> Thank you so much.
